Separate semantic conventions from the specification. (#227)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/0227-separate-semantic-conventions.md

git history.

There will also be the following exceptions in the specification:

- Semantic convetions used to implement API/SDK details will be fully specified
  and will not be allowed to change in the Semantic Convention directory.
  - Error/Exception handling will remain in the specification.
  - SDK configuration interaction w/ semantic convention will remain in the
    specification. Specifically `service.name`.
- The specification may elevate some semantic conventions as necessary for
  compatibility requirements, e.g. `service.instance.id` and
  [Prometheus Compatibility](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md).

These exceptions exist because:

- Stable portions of the specification already rely on these conventions
- These conventions are required to implement an SDK today.

As such, the Specification should define the absolute minimum of reserved or
required attribute names and their interaction with the SDK.

## Internal details

The following process would be used to ensure semantic conventions are
seamlessly moved to their new location.

> - A new repository `opentelemetry/semantic_conventions` will be constructed with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A new repository `open-telemetry/semantic-conventions` will be constructed with
```

  the proposed format and necessary `Makefile` / tooling.
- A moratorium will be placed on Semantic Convention PRs to the specififcation
  repository. (Caveat that PRs related to this proposal would be allowed).
- All semantic conventions in the Specification will be copied to the new
  repository.

> - Semantic conventions in the Specification will be marked as deprecated with

Reviewer 2: I suggest that we remove the semantic convention docs from the spec repo (for short-term, maybe just delete the contents and put a banner saying "things moved, here is the new location"), mainly due to the wording "deprecated" could introduce confusion.

Author: Maybe we do that eventually, but we need to deal with two realities:

1. We have in-flight data against the current SchemaURL of this repo.
2. There will be a transition period.

Reviewer 2: > 1. We have in-flight data against the current SchemaURL of this repo.

I assume permanent links are used?

> 2. There will be a transition period.

100%

Author: Yes, we should use permanent links.

Author: My main concern here is the tie of SchemaURL to semantic-versioning specification and the fact we're already at `1.x`.

Given discussion around what is considered breaking changes and the role of SchemaURL here, I don't think we have had any guarantee of stability for Semconv yet.

I'd like to get off on the right foot here with a `0.x` release denoting instability and a `1.x` denoting stability.

Author: We discussed this and, like it or not, we have "defacto stable" semconv today from remaining unchanged for so long.  As such, starting at 1.x seems reasonable.  We're going to have the first release from the new repo be 2.0 as there are some breaking changes, and we can figure out version denotations going forward from there.

  links to the new location.
- The Specification will be updated to require "special" conventions, like
  `service.name` and configuration interaction.
- Instrumentation authors will update their `SchemaURL` to
   `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`
   from

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/{spec_version}`

Reviewer: Is this effort/pain worth it or should we just keep the original URL form?

Reviewer: Or would this only apply to users updating to new versions post this move?

Author: This is because there will be a version split from the specification.  So the pain of moving is ONLY a  onetime thing for existing users, but also the new repository can start at a non-1.0 version number to denote the current instability.

Reviewer: > the new repository can start at a non-1.0 version number to denote the current instability

If we intend to indicate that using the single global version number, we'd never be able to go semconv `v1.0` though as there will always be some (new) unstable convention. (A subset of) HTTP that's considered stable would still be part of the `0.x` conventions. Maybe we should just go with `1.0.0` right away and (based on your "what stability actually enforces" proposal and other wording) define how to interpret versioning in the new repo. I assume we're keeping the stable/unstable markers for documents and sections to distinguish stability within the overall semantic-conventions repo.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should not use semver for the repository as a whole, but version conventions, or sets thereof, independently?

Reviewer 3: > an entire InstrumentationScope (Meter, Tracer, Logger) MUST be the same schema version family

This is problematic anyways, at least for tracing, because e.g. an exception event might be created by a different instrumentation using a different semconv version than the main span.

Reviewer 4: How would we approach HTTP stability wrt versions? Sounds like we'll need to split schema versions almost right away. 

Perhaps we can solve it with two versions:
- the default repo-level version set to 0.X applied to all unstable conventions
- the 'stable' version (1.X) applied to all stable conventions

Author: @lmolkova How would that work in relation to SchemaURL concerns I raised above?  I.e. is it technically feasible for us to have two versions split in one repo?

Reviewer 5: >This is because there will be a version split from the specification.

Why this is necessary? Why can't we continue version numbers 1.20+ in the new repo?

Reviewer 4: > How would that work in relation to SchemaURL concerns I raised above? I.e. is it technically feasible for us to have two versions split in one repo?

@jsuereth I can experiment to see if something goes wrong. On the high-level I don't see an issue if we think about version for the whole convention and not individual parts:
- Tracer/meter created for HTTP instrumentation sets schema to 1.X.  network conventions are shaded in and cannot move on their own.
- Tracer/meter for pure socket communication, gRPC, DB, etc set url to schema 0.X

Reviewer 5: I have a feeling we are overcomplicating things. What exactly is the problem we are solving by giving different parts of semconv different version numbers?

Reviewer 4: We also want to ship stable instrumentation libraries for HTTP,  so we need to have different [semconv artifacts](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-semconv) generated (stable and alpha).

So we have to have a way to distinguish stable and unstable conventions.

We can do it by separating semconv to `stable` and `experimental` folders and making tooling understand it.
Or by adding a `version` property in yaml that applies to the group.
E.g. 

```diff
  - id: network-core
    prefix: net
    type: attribute_group
    brief: These attributes may be used for any network-related operation.
+ version: 1.0.0

or

+ stable: true
    ...
````

In any case, this is needed regardless of where conventions live, @trask I hope we can discuss it with HTTP crew.

Reviewer 4: >  What exactly is the problem we are solving by giving different parts of semconv different version numbers?

@tigrannajaryan from my point of view, we can have the same version number, but the stable/experimental distinction is essential to ship instrumentation libraries with corresponding stability guarantees.

Reviewer 5: Totally agree with the need to distinguish stable and unstable conventions. I am just saying I don't think we should use version numbers to be the designators of the stability.

Author: @tigrannajaryan I agree we can avoid using version numbers to denote stability of conventions.

However, we *do* need something denote when stability has broken.  Without being able to leverage major version numbers, I'm concerned we're stuck.

Reviewer 5: >However, we do need something denote when stability has broken. Without being able to leverage major version numbers, I'm concerned we're stuck.

@jsuereth OK, sounds good. I am still not sure I understand _why_ we need denote the stability. For whom is this information? Is it for schema file consumers? Is it for semconv creators? Is it for instrumentation developers? Depending on the answer we may want a different solution.

Author: WE talked about this offline.  We want to denote stability in two fashions:

1. Programatically via SchemaURL
2. Intrinsically via Semantic Versioning of the SchemaURL version.

We expect (2) to catch the attention of OTEL Users who don't pay attention to details/nuances of our designs + discussions.

> 

Reviewer: Currently missing: Which semantic conventions version will we start with in the new repo?
`v0.0.1`, `v1.0.0`, `v1.21.0` (the spec is currently at `v1.20.0`), ...?

Author: Good callout, I can add this. I was planning to drop back to a `v0.0.1` or `v0.1` while we ramp-up to HTTP stability.

Reviewer: Alright if we go with this approach, we would need to use a new schema URL format anyway (https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/227#discussion_r1143577641) or we'd run into conflicts at some point.

Author: Exactly.  By using a different URL we also split into a new "schema family" so compliance with this new repo is not the same as compliance with the current spec "schema family".   This gives us a chance to migrate and understand the progress of that migration.

Reviewer 5: >Good callout, I can add this. I was planning to drop back to a v0.0.1 or v0.1 while we ramp-up to HTTP stability.

I don't understand why this decision. What is wrong with continuing the current version numbers? The Schema version numbers starting with 1.x don't imply any special stability that forces you to use 0.x to denote instability.

Author: I think there's a few "oddities" in the existing ecosystem we'll have to tease out and this migration is worth the effort.

E.g. the `enum` [discussion](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3225/files#r1150119273) and its implications on the stability of existing conventions and changes required.

That said, if we just want to migrate things over with the existing version and evolve in place, I think this may wind up with *harder* to deal with breakages, but I can carve out a path for this.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

This proposal has a few drawbacks:

- The semantic conventions will no longer be easily referencable form the specification.
  - This is actually a benefit. We can ensure isolation of convention from
    specification and require the Specification to use firm language for
    attributes it requires, like `service.name`.
  - We will provide x-links from existing location to the new location.

> - Semantic Convention version will no longer match the specification version.

Reviewer 6: Will this be a new version starting at `v0.0.0` or will it carry on from the version at which the spec and conventions diverged?  The Go API and Collector both use the schema version in package identifiers for semantic convention constants.

Author: This will be a new version number.

I'd suggest you'll want a new package name to avoid breakage as well.  This is why we plan to move the entire SchemaURL.  Effectively this will look/feel like a "new" thing to existing users to migrate to, hopefully alleviating breakages.

Reviewer 6: Changing the schema URL isn't an issue as there is a [constant](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/2e54fbb3fede5b54f316b3a08eab236febd854e0/semconv/v1.18.0/schema.go#L20) for the URL in each semconv package.  The [package name](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/v1.14.0/semconv/v1.18.0/doc.go#L20) we're using is `semconv` but the import paths include both `semconv` and the [corresponding spec versions](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel@v1.14.0/semconv).

What are other SIGs doing to keep versioned semconv constants available for use and how will this impact them?

Reviewer 5: I disagree that we need to reset the version numbers and introduce a new package names. See my other comments.

Author: @tigrannajaryan How would you ensure "safe" moving of semconv from current specification to the new repo?  I do *not* want a stop-the-world migration for all SiGs.

Reviewer 5: I posted a suggestion [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/227#discussion_r1168993110), let's continue in that thread.

Author: Updated this to include first released version.  PTAL.

  merged with OpenTelemetry prior to mass adoption or stable release of its
  specification.
- `Elastic Common Schema` - the schema is its own project / document.
- `Prometheus` - Prometheus does not define rigid guidelines for telemetry, like
  semantic conventions, instead relying on naming conventions and
  standardization through mass adoption.

## Open questions

This OTEP doesn't address the full needs of tooling and codegen that will be
needed for the community to shift to a separate semantic convention directory.
This will require each SiG that uses autogenarated semantic conventions to
adapt to the new location.

## Future possibilities

This OTEP paves way for the following desirable features:

- Semantic Conventions can decide to bump major version numbers to accommodate
  new signals or hard-to-resolve new domains without breaking the Specification
  version number.
- Semantic Conventions can have dedicated maintainers and approvers.
- Semantic Conventions can restructure to better enable subject matter experts
  (SMEs) to have approver/CODEOWNER status on relevant directories.

There is a desire to move semantic conventions to domain-specific directories

> instead of signal-specific. This can occur after a separation of the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instead of signal-specific. This can occur after a separation of the repository
and will be proposed and discussed separately from this OTEP.
```

  create instrumentation compliant with semantic conventions.
  - `resource/` - Contents of `{specification}/resource/semantic_conventions`
  - `trace/` - Contents of `{specification}/trace/semantic_conventions`
  - `metrics/` - Contents of `{specification}/metrics/semantic_conventions`
  - `logs/`- Contents of `{specification}/logs/semantic_conventions`
  - `schemas/` - A new location for [Telemetry Schemas](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/schemas/README.md)
    to live. This directory will be hosted at
    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/`

Existing semantic conventions in the specification would be marked as
deprecated, with documentation denoting the move.

Additionally, if the semantic conventions eventually move to domain-specific
director structure (e.g. `docs/{domain}/README.md`, with trace, metrics, events
in the same file), then this can be refactored in the new repository, preserving
git history.

There will also be the following exceptions in the specification:

- Semantic conventions used to implement API/SDK details will be fully specified

>   and will not be allowed to change in the Semantic Convention directory.

Author: Yes, I think that's likely what we do.

These exceptions exist because:

- Stable portions of the specification already rely on these conventions
- These conventions are required to implement an SDK today.

As such, the Specification should define the absolute minimum of reserved or
required attribute names and their interaction with the SDK.

## Internal details

The following process would be used to ensure semantic conventions are
seamlessly moved to their new location.

- A new repository `open-telemetry/semantic-conventions` will be constructed with
  the proposed format and necessary `Makefile` / tooling.
- A moratorium will be placed on Semantic Convention PRs to the specififcation
  repository. (Caveat that PRs related to this proposal would be allowed).
- All semantic conventions in the Specification will be copied to the new
  repository.
- Semantic conventions in the Specification will be marked as deprecated with
  links to the new location.
- The Specification will be updated to require "special" conventions, like
  `service.name` and configuration interaction.
- Instrumentation authors will update their `SchemaURL` to

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Reviewer 5: Do we specify anywhere that convention version numbers follow semver rules? I can't find it in our spec. If we don't do that then why is it implied that 1.x is stable?

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Author: Here's the docs:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/schemas/README.md#schema-version-number

```
Version numbers use the [ordering rules](https://semver.org/#spec-item-11) defined by semver 2.0 specification. See how ordering is used in the [Order of Transformations](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/schemas/file_format_v1.1.0.md#order-of-transformations). Other than the ordering rules the schema version numbers do not carry any other semantic meaning.
```

So you're right there is no semantic meaning of breaking dependency.  However, effectively that has crippled SchemaURLs right now.  The only mechanism we have to denote "breaking" is changing the Schema family -> i.e. the URL.   OpenTelemetry is *required* to use the same URL in the current experimental specification, therefore OTEL cannot ever break.

I can update this proposal to include some fixes to how SchemaURL interacts.  I *am* suggested the current specification for SchemaURL is problematic.

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Reviewer 5: If we need a way to denote breaking changes let's work on that. If we agree that the semver will be how we want to denote that then I will agree with you that we need to move back to 0.x.

However, I am not sure that that is the right solution to denote the breaking change. I think going to 0.x is unnecessarily disruptive. I think we may want to find a different solution that is less disruptive.

To understand what the solution should be I think we need to first explain what the problem is. I am not sure I understand the problem and I do not see it described anywhere. So to me the first question to answer is: why is it necessary to denote which semantic conventions are stable vs unstable and why does it need to be possible to understand by looking at the Schema URL? What is the expectation from the consumers of Schema URL? Why do the consumers care?

>I am suggested the current specification for SchemaURL is problematic.

That's entirely possible :-)

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Author: I understand you find this proposal disruptive.  I think moving semconv to a new location is *inherently* disruptive.  What this proposal does is try to embrace the distruptive in a way that's beneficial to community.  Specifically by:

1. Making it clear the disruption is happening.
2. Allowing Language SiGs to migrate-at-their-own pace.

If you think there's a way to do this switch with less disruption, I'd like to see the proposal.  I want to avoid the situation w/ Spec changes + Language SiGs are held "hostage" by a large forced migration to the new repository.

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Reviewer 5: >I think moving semconv to a new location is inherently disruptive.

Moving the content to a different repository does not need to be disruptive from schema publishing perspective. We can continue the current schema family with zero disruption.

>What this proposal does is try to embrace the distruptive in a way that's beneficial to community. Specifically by:
>Making it clear the disruption is happening.
>Allowing Language SiGs to migrate-at-their-own pace.

I think the disruption is avoidable, so we don't necessarily need to embrace it. :-)

I see 2 elements in this change:
1. Moving the source of truth for conventions to a different repository decouples them from the specification and allows conventions to be freed from overly strict processes we rightfully have in place for the spec repo and instead adopt their own processes. It also allows finer granularity in permission control. This will allow semantic convention contributors to move faster and in my opinion is a good idea and is a win for everyone.
2. Schemas that describe semantic conventions are published from this spec repo, which is currently the source of truth for conventions. We plan to move the source of truth to a different physical repository. This is fine and I do not see any reason for people who _consume_ schemas. They don't need to know which github repository contains the original schema files. Today the schemas are published at https://opentelemetry.io/schemas and they can continue being published at the same place after the original schema files are moved from spec repo to a semconv repo.

>If you think there's a way to do this switch with less disruption, I'd like to see the proposal. 

Here is I think what we can do:
1. Copy the existing semconv content and schema files from the spec repo to a new repo.
1. Create new teams and introduce any new processes wanted on the new repo.
1. Delete convention yaml files and schema yaml files from spec repo to prevent accidental usage in the future. 
1. Language SIGs can begin using the yaml files from the new repo next time they need update their generated semconvs. The [semconv generator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/build-tools/tree/main/semantic-conventions) should work fine with the new repo. SIGs can do this at their pace.
1. Add a notice in convention md files in the spec repo saying that semconv is moved.
1. Change opentelemetry.io/schemas publishing process to consume schema files from the new repo.
1. Continue publishing schemas within the same schema family, without resetting version numbers.

Let me know if you want me to elaborate on the process.

>I want to avoid the situation w/ Spec changes + Language SiGs are held "hostage" by a large forced migration to the new repository.

I may be missing something but I don't see the large forced migration that you are referring to. Can you please clarify?

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Author: So before (1) we need to place a moratorium on semconv in the Specification so that no changes CAN occur during the transition.

Regarding (3) we cannot delete the yaml files until language sigs have moved their code generation, others we've possibly broken their builds or process.  Also, deleting this would break our existing checks on markdown + semconv.

Additionally, there should be a clear signal from language SiGs that the migration has completed so we know when we could remove semconv from the latest branches in the specification.

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Reviewer 5: >So before (1) we need to place a moratorium on semconv in the Specification so that no changes CAN occur during the transition.

Sounds good. We should aim to execute this plan as quickly as possible to minimize the time period when we cannot change/add conventions.

>Regarding (3) we cannot delete the yaml files until language sigs have moved their code generation, others we've possibly broken their builds or process. 

From what I understand code generation is used only when a new version of semconv is introduced (new version of spec today). Language SIGs will not need to use the code generator because we will not be making new releases until the transition to the new repo is complete.

We can double check this with language SIGs to make sure what I am saying is correct. If any of the language sigs uses the code generator for any other purpose (e.g. as part of regular builds somehow) then we can do what you suggest and delay the deletion of exiting yaml files until no-one depends on them anymore.

The code generator currently requires the path to the yaml files to be specified as a [command line parameter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/build-tools/tree/main/semantic-conventions#code-generator). It is not hard-coded to the spec repo in any way. So there are no changes in the generator itself and for language SIGs the change is minimal, they will need to update their processes to reference the new repo (which the code generator expects to be somewhere in a local directory). Here is for example [how it is done in Go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/main/RELEASING.md#semantic-convention-generation).

I have not checked the other languages, we can work with all maintainers to confirm that they do something similar.

>Also, deleting this would break our existing checks on markdown + semconv.

We should also remove the checks when we delete the yamls. Markdown will be manually marked "deprecated" or "moved" and will be frozen in that state. Checks won't be necessary anymore.

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Author: > We can double check this with language SIGs to make sure what I am saying is correct. If any of the language sigs uses the code generator for any other purpose (e.g. as part of regular builds somehow) then we can do what you suggest and delay the deletion of exiting yaml files until no-one depends on them anymore.

We rely on the YAML files in the specification itself to ensure all Markdown tables are actually up-to-date with the YAML.  That's the main reason we can't delete them.

> The code generator currently requires the path to the yaml files to be specified as a [command line parameter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/build-tools/tree/main/semantic-conventions#code-generator).

Yes, I'm aware of this.  The automation still hardcodes pulling down the specification repo, so that needs to change.  While it's not a large change, it's still something every langauge/collector will need to do.

> We should also remove the checks when we delete the yamls. Markdown will be manually marked "deprecated" or "moved" and will be frozen in that state. Checks won't be necessary anymore.

That's fair.  I still think we should delay doing this until we're comfortable with the new repository and have fully shifted to it.

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Reviewer 5: Sounds good. Let's just aim to make the transition period as short as possible. I can help with execution.

>    `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/{semconv_version}`

Author: Think we're aligned, updated the specification appropriately.

   from
   `https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/{spec_version}`

## Trade-offs and mitigations

This proposal has a few drawbacks:

- The semantic conventions will no longer be easily referencable form the specification.
  - This is actually a benefit. We can ensure isolation of convention from
    specification and require the Specification to use firm language for
    attributes it requires, like `service.name`.
  - We will provide x-links from existing location to the new location.

> - Semantic Convention version will no longer match the specification version.

Reviewer 5: >- Semantic Convention version will no longer match the specification version.

I think this is fine, but IMO the next version of conventions and of SchemaURL should be v1.20.0 (or whatever is the version of the spec after the split happens).

Author: How would deal with the confusion where people would go to the specification version to look for semconv?  

SchemaURL does NOT denote where the definition lies, it only tracks changes.   Right now, the community is tuned into looking at the specification for the current URL.

My suggestion of a new URL is to help aide with training folks to look in a new place for the new version and NOT expect the specification to hold semconv going forward.

Reviewer 5: >How would deal with the confusion where people would go to the specification version to look for semconv?

We are planning to plaster the markdown in spec repo with "WARNING: DEPRECATED/MOVED TO FOO!!!" everywhere, right? We have to do it regardless since the community is tuned to go to the spec repo anyway. I am not sure how keeping the current Schema URL family makes it worse, especially since the Schema URL does not suggest in any way that the semconvs or schema files must be found in the spec repo.

>My suggestion of a new URL is to help aide with training folks to look in a new place for the new version and NOT expect the specification to hold semconv going forward.

I think this is solvable by warning messages in the markdown and links to the new repo. I think we can go a step further and as soon as the transition is complete delete the main content in the spec repo's markdown files and  only keep the warning and links to the new repo. There is no way to be confused when you land in the spec repo and see that.

Author: We chatted about this in person. I've updated the PR as follows:

1. we will do the process you suggest.
2. We will NOT change the schema url location
3. We WILL change the schema url version on our first release to denote moving away from schema version.

Reviewer 5: >We WILL change the schema url version on our first release to denote moving away from schema version.

Didi you mean "to denote moving away from spec version"?

# Separate Semantic Conventions

> Move Semantic Conventions outside of the main Specificaiton and version them

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Move Semantic Conventions outside of the main Specification and version them
```

convention would require bumping the version number of the entirety of the
OpenTelemetry specification.

## Explanation

A new github repository called `semantic-conventions` would be created in the
OpenTelemetry organization.

This would *initially* have the following structure:

- Boilerplate files, e.g. `README.md`, `LICENSE`, `CODEOWNERS`, `CONTRIBUTING.md`
- `Makefile` that allows automatic generation of documentation from model.
- `semantic_conventions/` The set of YAML files that exist in
  `{specification}/semantic_conventions` today.
- `docs/` A new directory that contains human readable documentation for how to
  create instrumentation compliant with semantic conventions.
  - `resource/` - Contents of `{specification}/resource/semantic_conventions`
  - `trace/` - Contents of `{specification}/trace/semantic_conventions`
  - `metrics/` - Contents of `{specification}/metrics/semantic_conventions`
  - `logs/`- Contents of `{specification}/logs/semantic_conventions`
  - `schemas/` - A new location for [Telemetry Schemas](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/schemas/README.md)
    to live. This directory will be hosted at

>     `https://opentelemetry.io/semantic_conventions/schemas/`

Reviewer 5: I think we agreed to contiunue the same Schema family, right?
```suggestion
    `https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/`
```

Author: Yes, this was just an oversite.

Existing semantic conventions in the specification would be marked as

> deprecated, with documentation denoting the move.

Reviewer 5: Would it be more precise to say "moved" instead of "deprecated"?

Additionally, if the semantic conventions eventually move to domain-specific
director structure (e.g. `docs/{domain}/README.md`, with trace, metrics, events
in the same file), then this can be refactored in the new repository, preserving
git history.

There will also be the following exceptions in the specification:

> - Semantic conventions used to implement API/SDK details will be fully specified

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Semantic conventions used to implement API/SDK details will be fully specified in the `opentelemetry-specification` repo
```

  - Error/Exception handling will remain in the specification.
  - SDK configuration interaction w/ semantic convention will remain in the
    specification. Specifically `service.name`.
- The specification may elevate some semantic conventions as necessary for
  compatibility requirements, e.g. `service.instance.id` and
  [Prometheus Compatibility](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md).

These exceptions exist because:

- Stable portions of the specification already rely on these conventions
- These conventions are required to implement an SDK today.

As such, the Specification should define the absolute minimum of reserved or
required attribute names and their interaction with the SDK.

## Internal details

The following process would be used to ensure semantic conventions are
seamlessly moved to their new location. This process lists steps in order:

- A moratorium will be placed on Semantic Convention PRs to the specififcation
  repository. (Caveat that PRs related to this proposal would be allowed).
- Interactions between Semantic Conventions and the Specification will be

>   extracted such that the Specification can require things of Semantic

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  extracted such that the Specification can place requirements on Semantic
```

  Conventions and *normative* specification language will remain in the
  core specification directories.
- A new repository `open-telemetry/semantic-conventions` will be constructed with
  the proposed format and necessary `Makefile` / tooling.
  - The new repository would be created by using `git filter-branch` to preserve
    all existing semantic convention history. *This means all existing
    semantic conventions will be in the new repository*.
  - Github Actions, `Makefile` tooling and contributing / readmes would be
    updated for the separate repository.
  - **Note: At this point, the new location for semantic conventions should
      be adoptable/usable.**
- Semantic conventions in the Specification will be marked as deprecated with
  links to the new location.
  - The semconv YAML files in the specification repository *will be deleted*.
  - All semconv markdown files will be updated such that:
    - They no longer generate from YAML files.
    - They include a header denoting deprecation and move to the new repository.
- Instrumentation authors will update their code generation to pull from the new
  semconv repository instead of the specification repository..

> - The new repository will have its first released versioned be `2.0.0`, to avoid

Reviewer 5: Just to confirm: as a consequence does this mean that the next SchemaURL will be `https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/2.0.0`?

Reviewer 5: Sounds good. 

Let's just keep in our mind that changing the major version number doesn't signify anything special, see  [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/schemas#schema-version-number):
>Other than the ordering rules the schema version numbers do not carry any other semantic meaning.

Author: Agreed.  We still need to figure out how to denote this in Schemas

    confusion with specification version.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

This proposal has a few drawbacks:

- The semantic conventions will no longer be easily referencable form the specification.
  - This is actually a benefit. We can ensure isolation of convention from
    specification and require the Specification to use firm language for
    attributes it requires, like `service.name`.

>   - We will provide x-links from existing location to the new location.

Reviewer 5: What's an x-link?

Author: a cross-line, reworded to just link

- Semantic Convention version will no longer match the specification version.
  - Instrumentation authors will need to consume a separate semantic-convention

>     bundle from Specification bundle. What used to be ONE upgrade effort will

Reviewer 5: We expect that the very small number of conventions in the spec repo will change very infrequently. Vast majority of upgrades are going to be induced by semantic-convetion repo releases.

Question: are you suggesting that we also keep the yaml files in spec repo, containing those few conventions that spec defines and that semconv code generator is able to consume the yaml files from both spec repo and semantic-conventions repo? Or does code generator only use semantic-conventions repo as the source?

Author: Code generator only uses semantic convention repo as source.  The specification can require certain attributes have certain meaning, but we'd only YAML that in the semconv repo.

    now be split into two (hopefully smaller) efforts.
  - We expect changes from Semantic Conventions and Specification to be

>     orthogonal, so this should not add significant wall-clock time.

Reviewer 5: I am not sure about complete orthogonality here. If `service.name` is in the spec and the rest of Service attributes are in the new repo and the identity of the Service is defined as a combination of all those attributes then there is still some (weak) coupling. I agree this should not add significant wall-clock, so in the end I don't think this is a problem, but want to make sure others don't mis-read this.

Author: I can change it to be "mostly orthogonal". I agree there's nuance, but for the majority of semconv we don't see tight coupling between spec + semconv.

> - Existing PRs against semantic conventions will need tobe regenerated.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Existing PRs against semantic conventions will need to be regenerated.
```

> Initially this repository would have the following ownership:

Reviewer 5: I can be also added as a CODEOWNER for everything related to schemas to help review PRs.

# Separate Semantic Conventions

Move Semantic Conventions outside of the main Specifications and version them
separately.

## Motivation

We need to allow semantic conventions to evolve mostly independent of the
overall OpenTelemetry specification. Today, any breaking change in a semantic
convention would require bumping the version number of the entirety of the
OpenTelemetry specification.

## Explanation

> A new github repository called `semantic-conventions` would be created in the

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
A new GitHub repository called `semantic-conventions` would be created in the
```

OpenTelemetry organization.

This would *initially* have the following structure:

- Boilerplate files, e.g. `README.md`, `LICENSE`, `CODEOWNERS`, `CONTRIBUTING.md`
- `Makefile` that allows automatic generation of documentation from model.
- `semantic_conventions/` The set of YAML files that exist in
  `{specification}/semantic_conventions` today.

> - `docs/` A new directory that contains human readable documentation for how to

Reviewer 8: Is this the so-called "supplementary guidelines"?

  create instrumentation compliant with semantic conventions.
  - `resource/` - Contents of `{specification}/resource/semantic_conventions`
  - `trace/` - Contents of `{specification}/trace/semantic_conventions`
  - `metrics/` - Contents of `{specification}/metrics/semantic_conventions`
  - `logs/`- Contents of `{specification}/logs/semantic_conventions`
  - `schemas/` - A new location for [Telemetry Schemas](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/schemas/README.md)
    to live. This directory will be hosted at
    `https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/`

Existing semantic conventions in the specification would be marked as

> moved, with documentation denoting the move, but preserving previous contents.

Reviewer 5: Nit: we seem to use "moved" vs "deprecated" in some place. It would be good to settle on one term.

Author: Jack fixed this one.

Additionally, if the semantic conventions eventually move to domain-specific
directory structure (e.g. `docs/{domain}/README.md`, with trace, metrics, events
in the same file), then this can be refactored in the new repository, preserving
git history.

There will also be the following exceptions in the specification:

- Semantic conventions used to implement API/SDK details will be fully specified in the `opentelemetry-specification` repo
  and will not be allowed to change in the Semantic Convention directory.
  - Error/Exception handling will remain in the specification.
  - SDK configuration interaction w/ semantic convention will remain in the
    specification. Specifically `service.name`.
- The specification may elevate some semantic conventions as necessary for

>   compatibility requirements, e.g. `service.instance.id` and

Reviewer 9: It's obvious the two repos will be referencing each other. Why can't there be a clean separation of _responsibilities_? Spec can say that `service.name` must be defined and how it impacts SDK etc, but at the same time refer to SemConv for usual details of an attribute.

If we have this explicit exclusion for _some_ attributes, we would also need to bifurcate the schemas, which would be bad.

Author: Maybe may language is not clear.  The idea here is what you're suggesting. 

Specification can enforce that certain attributes MUST exist in semantic conventions and defines usage/interaction w/ SDK or other OTel things.

The Semconv MUST include those attributes in its YAML and define semantics for them.

The requirements, though, should only flow one-way.  Specification can force semconv to include attributes, but semconv should NOT force any specification normative language.

>   [Prometheus Compatibility](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md).

Reviewer 8: On a related note, there's also the (experimental) Compatibility semantic conventions section, which only includes OpenTracing values at the moment: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/compatibility.md 

I'd vow to keep them in the Spec as well but I'm open to discuss it.

Author: If you want them in the Specification, I'd suggest you put them here:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/opentracing.md

We can still move the YAML files to the new repository and do a similar "specification owns these attributes and requires them in semconv" behavior we're using for things like `service.name`

@carlosalberto would you be able to put that PR to the specification together?  For now I'll assume the existing YAML/MD is being pulled to the semconv repository based on my proposal above.

Reviewer 8: Works, will send a PR to move them to the opentracind.md doc.

These exceptions exist because:

> - Stable portions of the specification already rely on these conventions

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
- Stable portions of the specification already rely on these conventions.
```

- These conventions are required to implement an SDK today.

As such, the Specification should define the absolute minimum of reserved or
required attribute names and their interaction with the SDK.

## Internal details

The following process would be used to ensure semantic conventions are
seamlessly moved to their new location. This process lists steps in order:

> - A moratorium will be placed on Semantic Convention PRs to the specififcation

Reviewer 11: if HTTP semconv PRs are going to be blocked until semconv 2.0 is released from the new repo, I'm interested to see language that this move is going to start (at least) soon

```suggestion
- As soon as this OTEP is merged,
- a moratorium will be placed on Semantic Convention PRs to the specififcation
```

Reviewer 12: OTEPs go into effect when they are merged (unless stated otherwise)

```suggestion
- A moratorium is placed on Semantic Convention PRs to the specififcation
```

Reviewer 2: specififcation -> specification

Author: This isn't how OTEPs work.  OTEPs are design docs, plans.  The actually changes need to hit the Specification and go through approval there.

SO yes, this OTEP (the plan) goes into effect when merged.  However, a moratorium on the Specificiation still needs to be a PR *in* the specification repository with clear messaging to specification contributors.  While most of us may follow OTEPS + specs, not everyone does.  This is why the execution of the plan hinges on that PR.

>   repository. (Caveat that PRs related to this proposal would be allowed).

Reviewer 8: What about existing experimental conventions in the SDK, such as `service.version`? I'm taking for granted they will remain in the SDK _and_ as experimental for now, but would like to clarify this.

Author: This moratorium will need to apply to ANY change right now.

The moratorium is only to ensure we get a clean copy of semconv history in the repository and it will be lifted ASAP (I'm hoping ~2 hours for the process to run).

After the moratorium is over, you could have a PR to the specification on `service.version` as this is the kind of attribute that *needs* to be mandated by the specification.

- Interactions between Semantic Conventions and the Specification will be
  extracted such that the Specification can place requirements on Semantic
  Conventions and *normative* specification language will remain in the
  core specification directories.
- A new repository `open-telemetry/semantic-conventions` will be constructed with
  the proposed format and necessary `Makefile` / tooling.
  - The new repository would be created by using `git filter-branch` to preserve
    all existing semantic convention history. *This means all existing
    semantic conventions will be in the new repository*.

>   - Github Actions, `Makefile` tooling and contributing / readmes would be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - GitHub Actions, `Makefile` tooling and contributing / readmes would be
```

    updated for the separate repository.
  - **Note: At this point, the new location for semantic conventions should
      be adoptable/usable.**

> - Semantic conventions in the Specification will be marked as deprecated with

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
- Semantic conventions in the Specification will be marked as moved with
```

  links to the new location.
  - The semconv YAML files in the specification repository *will be deleted*.
  - All semconv markdown files will be updated such that:
    - They no longer generate from YAML files.
    - They include a header denoting deprecation and move to the new repository.
- Instrumentation authors will update their code generation to pull from the new
  semconv repository instead of the specification repository..

> - The new repository will have its first released versioned be `2.0.0`, to avoid

Reviewer 9: > to avoid confusion with specification version

Not very clear on this motivation. What confusion? The intention is that these will diverge quickly anyway, and if 2.x SC vs. 1.x Spec looks like a difference, at some point Spec will also may be 2.x

Basically, I don't think we should bump to 2.x, just let the versions roll.

Reviewer 6: My biggest concern here is that we don't go backward.  I don't know that I have a strong preference for starting from `1.22` (or whatever the next minor version would be at the time) or `2.0`, but starting at `1.0` or `0.1` would be problematic for versioned semconv packages and schema URLs.

Reviewer 5: We definitely don't want to go backwards.

In addition @jsuereth suggests that we have a way to indicate in the version number that breaking changes occurred. I think it is not a bad idea, but we don't have to agree on it in this OTEP. It may be worth removing this particular sentence from the OTEP and make the OTEP strictly about the "separation from the spec".

Author: As discussed in Specification SiG -

Here's my reasoning for 2.0.

- We want to clearly denote that the semconv no longer follows the specification version.  SO the first release will definitely be different than the specification.
- We *cannot* go backwards in number, as SchemaURL requires semconv *ordering* of versions.
- I think it's important we use semantic versioning as an *implicit* signal of breaking changes to semconv, where the Schema file should give *explicit* signal of breaking changes.  We know HTTP semconv has broken for this next release.

Author: To resolve this, we moved this to "open questions".   We can continue this discussion of what version to use for the first release of semconv in the semconv repository.

> - The new repository will have its first released versioned be `2.0.0`, to avoid

Reviewer 10: Would we plan on having a major version bump for the proposed changes to the http semantic conventions? If yes, should we bundle those changes with this? If no, ignore.

Author: I would like to do that, yes.  That's a discussion that belongs outside this OTEP.  First is if we separate, next is details on HTTP semconv stability + breakage.

Reviewer 8: @jsuereth I'm also expecting you won't have monthly releases, now that this will be split off of the Spec?

    confusion with specification version.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

This proposal has a few drawbacks:

> - The semantic conventions will no longer be easily referencable form the specification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The semantic conventions will no longer be easily referenceable form the specification.
```

  - This is actually a benefit. We can ensure isolation of convention from
    specification and require the Specification to use firm language for
    attributes it requires, like `service.name`.
  - We will provide links from existing location to the new location.
- Semantic Convention version will no longer match the specification version.
  - Instrumentation authors will need to consume a separate semantic-convention

>     bundle from Specification bundle. What used to be ONE upgrade effort will

Reviewer 9: what would be in the "Specification bundle"?

>     now be split into two (hopefully smaller) efforts.

Reviewer 10: In the java SIG, we discussed breaking out a new repository to hold the generated code for the semantic conventions. Something like `semantic-conventions-java`. This artifact could be versioned in sync with the `semantic-conventions` repo and the other java repo `opentelemetry-java` and `opentelemetry-java-instrumentation` would take a dependency on it.

Reviewer 12: We have this in JS as well. In practice it is tough to version exactly with the semconv and we decided to keep our own version numbers. Now that it's a bit more stable and we're not refactoring it and making changes like that it might be easier.

Author: I would recommend at least using a bifurcated version strategy here:

1. The version of semconv
2. The version of the *codegen* for semconv.

This way if codegen changes in a breaking manner you can bump versions.  Otherwise you'd be forced to limit codegen fixes, and you may find you *need* to make breaking changes there.  The semconv version won't be able to reflect that.

Note: this is the same debate as OTLP versioning and generated protobuf repositories.

  - We expect changes from Semantic Conventions and Specification to be
    orthogonal, so this should not add significant wall-clock time.
- Existing PRs against semantic conventions will need to be regenerated.

Initially this repository would have the following ownership:

- Approvers
  - [Christian Neumüller](https://github.com/Oberon00), Dynatrace
  - [James Moessis](https://github.com/jamesmoessis), Atlassian
  - [Joao Grassi](https://github.com/joaopgrassi), Dynatrace
  - [Johannes Tax](https://github.com/pyohannes), Microsoft
  - [Liudmila Molkova](https://github.com/lmolkova), Microsoft
  - [Sean Marcinak](https://github.com/MovieStoreGuy), Atlassian
  - [Ted Young](https://github.com/tedsuo), Lightstep
- Approvers (HTTP Only)
  - [Trask Stalnaker](github.com/trask)
- Approvers (SchemaUrl Files)
  - [Tigran Najaryan](github.com/tigrannajaryan)
- Maintainers
  - [Josh Suereth](github.com/jsuereth)

>   - [Armin Reuch](github.com/arminru)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Armin Ruech](github.com/arminru)
```
🙂

  - [Reiley Yang](github.com/reyang)

That is, Maintenance would initially continue to fall on (a subset of) the

> Technical committee. Approvers would start with existing semconv approvers in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Technical Committee. Approvers would start with existing semconv approvers in
```

addition to targeted at HTTP semantic convention stability approvers and
expand rapidly as we build momentum on semantic conventions.

## Prior art and alternatives

When we evaluate equivalent communities and efforts we see the following:

- `OpenTracing` - had specification and [semantics](https://github.com/opentracing/specification/blob/master/semantic_conventions.md)
  merged.
- `OpenCensus` - had specification and semantics merged. However, OpenCensus
  merged with OpenTelemetry prior to mass adoption or stable release of its
  specification.
- `Elastic Common Schema` - the schema is its own project / document.
- `Prometheus` - Prometheus does not define rigid guidelines for telemetry, like
  semantic conventions, instead relying on naming conventions and
  standardization through mass adoption.

## Open questions

This OTEP doesn't address the full needs of tooling and codegen that will be
needed for the community to shift to a separate semantic convention directory.

> This will require each SiG that uses autogenarated semantic conventions to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will require each SIG that uses autogenerated semantic conventions to
```

adapt to the new location.

## Future possibilities

This OTEP paves way for the following desirable features:

- Semantic Conventions can decide to bump major version numbers to accommodate
  new signals or hard-to-resolve new domains without breaking the Specification
  version number.
- Semantic Conventions can have dedicated maintainers and approvers.
- Semantic Conventions can restructure to better enable subject matter experts
  (SMEs) to have approver/CODEOWNER status on relevant directories.
- Semantic Conventions can adopt semantic versioning for itself, helping clearly
  denote breaking changes to users.

There is a desire to move semantic conventions to domain-specific directories

> instead of signal-specific. This can occur after a separation of the repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
instead of signal-specific. This can occur after the separation of the repository
```
